User guide
===========

Create scATAC-seq fragments file
--------------------------------

An ATAC-seq fragment file can be created from a BAM file using the ``fragments`` command.
The fragment file contains the position of each Tn5 integration site, the cell barcode 
associated with the fragment, and the number of times the fragment was sequenced. 
PCR duplicates are collapsed.

.. code-block:: none
    
    sinto fragments [-h] -b BAM -f FRAGMENTS [-m MIN_MAPQ] [-p NPROC]
                       [-t BARCODETAG] [-c CELLS]
                       [--barcode_regex BARCODE_REGEX] [--use_chrom USE_CHROM]
                       [--max_distance MAX_DISTANCE]

    Create ATAC-seq fragment file from BAM file

    optional arguments:
    -h, --help            show this help message and exit
    -b BAM, --bam BAM     Input bam file (must be indexed)
    -f FRAGMENTS, --fragments FRAGMENTS
                            Name and path for output fragments file. Note that the
                            output is not sorted or compressed. To sort the output
                            file use sort -k 1,1 -k2,2n
    -m MIN_MAPQ, --min_mapq MIN_MAPQ
                            Minimum MAPQ required to retain fragment (default =
                            30)
    -p NPROC, --nproc NPROC
                            Number of processors (default = 1)
    -t BARCODETAG, --barcodetag BARCODETAG
                            Read tag storing cell barcode information (default =
                            "CB")
    -c CELLS, --cells CELLS
                            Path to file containing cell barcodes to retain, or a
                            comma-separated list of cell barcodes. If None
                            (default), use all cell barocodes present in the BAM
                            file.
    --barcode_regex BARCODE_REGEX
                            Regular expression used to extract cell barcode from
                            read name. If None (default), extract cell barcode
                            from read tag. Use "[^:]*" to match all characters up
                            to the first colon.
    --use_chrom USE_CHROM
                            Regular expression used to match chromosomes to be
                            included in output. Default is "(?i)^chr" to match all
                            chromosomes starting with "chr", case insensitive
    --max_distance MAX_DISTANCE
                            Maximum distance between integration sites for the
                            fragment to be retained. Allows filtering of
                            implausible fragments that likely result from
                            incorrect mapping positions. Default is 5000 bp.
   --chunksize CHUNKSIZE
                           Number of BAM file entries to iterate over before
                           collapsing the fragments and writing to disk. Higher
                           chunksize will use more memory but will be faster.

Fragment file format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fragment file is a BED format file containing the positions of Tn5 integration
sites, the cell barcode that the DNA fragment originated from, and the number
of times the fragment was sequenced. See the `10x Genomics <https://support.10xgenomics
.com/single-cell-atac/software/pipelines/latest/output/fragments>`_
website for a further description of the fragment file format.

This is a convenient compressed form of the most useful data generated in a 
scATAC-seq experiment. The fragments file generated by Sinto needs to be sorted,
block-gzip compressed (`bgzip <https://www.htslib.org/doc/bgzip.html>`_),
and indexed using `tabix <https://www.htslib.org/doc/tabix.html>`_.

For example:

.. code-block:: bash

    sort -k 1,1 -k2,2n frags.bed > frags.sort.bed
    bgzip frags.sort.bed
    tabix -p bed frags.sort.bed

How the fragment file is generated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generating the fragment file involves the following steps in order:

1. Remove soft-clipped bases from the alignment position.
2. Extract cell barcode sequence associated with the fragment.
3. Adjust alignment positions for the 9 bp Tn5 shift by
   applying +4/-5 to the start and end position of the paired reads.
4. Remove fragments where either read has a MAPQ score less than
   the specified cutoff.
5. Remove fragments where the fragment size is greater than the 
   specified maximum.
6. Collapse PCR duplicates:

    1. Count the frequency of each fragment for each cell barcode.
    2. Within a cell barocode, collapse fragments that share 
       a start or end coordinate on the same chromosome.
    3. Across all cell barcodes, collapse fragments that share 
       the exact start and end coordinates on the same chromosome.
    4. Assign the fragment to the most abundant cell barcode.
    5. Record the read count for the collapsed fragment.

7. Write fragments to file. Note that fragments are not sorted
   or compressed.


Additional arguments for the fragments function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Number of processors: ``--nproc``
_________________________________

Multiple cores can be used by specifying the ``--nproc`` argument.
Specifying multiple processors will parallelize across chromosomes. Currently,
at most one thread is used per chromosome, so there is no point specifiying
more processors than the number of chromosomes.

Minimum mapping quality: ``--min_mapq``
_______________________________________

The minimum allowed mapping quality (MAPQ) can be set using ``--min_mapq``. 
Depending on the aligner used, the MAPQ value can mean different `things
<https://sequencing.qcfail.com/articles/mapq-values-are-really-useful-but-their-implementation-is-a-mess/>`_. 
Cellranger-atac uses ``bwa-mem`` for alignment, which follows the SAM spec and 
reports Phred scores as MAPQ values:

    MAPping Quality.  It equals -10 log10 Pr {mapping position is wrong},
    rounded to the nearest integer.  A value 255 indicates that the
    mapping quality is not available.

Cell barcode tag: ``--barcodetag``
__________________________________

Different methods may use different tags to store the cell barcode.
Cellranger uses the ``CB`` tag, which is set as the default for Sinto.
Other methods may use different tags, for example SNARE-seq uses the ``XC`` tag.
You can work out what tag is used by looking at part of the BAM file:
``samtools view aln.bam | head``.

Cell barcode regex: ``--barcode_regex``
_______________________________________

Some methods store the cell barcode in the read name rather than under a read tag.
If this is the case, you can use a regular expression to extract the cell barcode
from the read name. For example, if the first section of your read name 
up until the first ``:`` character corresponds to the cell barcode sequence,
you can specify ``--barcode_regex [^:]*`` to correcly match the cell barcodes.

Choosing chromosomes to include: ``--use_chrom``
________________________________________________

Often a genome build might contain several scaffolds that are not typically used in
downstream analysis. This option allows you to specify a regular expression to
match chromosome names that will be retained in the output. By default, 
all chromosomes starting with "chr" are retained, case insensitive (ie,
"Chr", and "CHR" are also retained).

Set the maximum distance between Tn5 integration sites: ``--max_distance``
__________________________________________________________________________

Incorrect alignment can sometimes generate implausible fragment coordinates.
Since we known there is an upper limit to the size of a DNA molecule that 
can be sequenced on the Illumina platform, very large fragments over 5 kb 
in size likely originate from incorrect read mapping. We can remove these 
to reduce the impact of mapping artefacts on the downstream analysis 
by setting the ``--max_distance`` parameter. Fragments larger than
this value will not be included in the output file.

Set the maximum number of fragments to hold in memory before collapsing: ``--chunksize``
________________________________________________________________________________________

The fragments algorithm iterates through a position-sorted BAM file and stores
fragment information as it iterates through the paired reads. Once all the 
reads at a genomic locus have been read, the fragments covering that locus can
be PCR-collapsed. Sinto performs this step in chunks to balance speed and memory 
use. The ``--chunksize`` parameter controls how many fragments are able to be 
held in memory before they get collapsed and written to a file. Setting a larger
value should require more memory but the function will complete faster.

Filter cell barcodes from BAM file
----------------------------------

Reads for a subset of cells can be extracted from a BAM file using the ``filterbarcodes`` command.
This requires a position-sorted, indexed BAM file, and a file containing a list of cell barcodes to retain.

.. code-block:: none

    sinto filterbarcodes [-h] -b BAM -c CELLS -o OUTPUT [-t] [-s]
                            [-p NPROC] [--barcode_regex BARCODE_REGEX]
                            [--barcodetag BARCODETAG]

   Filter reads based on input list of cell barcodes

   optional arguments:
   -h, --help            show this help message and exit
   -b BAM, --bam BAM     Input bam file (must be indexed)
   -c CELLS, --cells CELLS
                           File or comma-separated list of cell barcodes. Can be
                           gzip compressed
   -t, --trim_suffix     Remove trail 2 characters from cell barcode in BAM
                           file
   -p NPROC, --nproc NPROC
                           Number of processors (default = 1)
   --barcode_regex BARCODE_REGEX
                           Regular expression used to extract cell barcode from
                           read name. If None (default), extract cell barcode
                           from read tag. Use "[^:]*" to match all characters up
                           to the first colon.
   --barcodetag BARCODETAG
                           Read tag storing cell barcode information (default =
                           "CB")

The input "cells" file should be a tab-delimited text file with cell barcodes in 
the first column and the groups the cell belongs to in the second column. This 
could be the cluster number, for example. A cell can belong to multiple groups
specified in the file using a comma-separated list of groups. If multiple 
groups are provided, reads from that cell will be copied to the output BAM
file for each of the groups.

Example input "cells" file:

.. code-block:: none

    TGGCAATGTTGAAGCG-1	A
    GACCAATCACCATTCC-1	A
    CAGGATTCAGAACTTC-1	B
    GAACCTAAGAGAGGTA-1	B,A
    ACATGGTGTAGACGCA-1	C
    CCCTGATTCGGATAGG-1	C

The names of the output BAM files are determined by the name of each group in the 
input cells file. The example file above would generate three bam files, 
named ``A.bam``, ``B.bam``, and ``C.bam``. Note that reads from the fourth cell
would appear in both ``B.bam`` and ``A.bam``.


Add read tags to BAM file
-------------------------

Read tags can be added to a BAM file according to which cell the read belongs to using the ``addtags`` command.
This requires a position-sorted and indexed BAM file, and a file specifying the tags to be added to each cell, for example:

.. code-block:: none

    TGGCAATGTTGAAGCG-1	CI	A
    GACCAATCACCATTCC-1	CI	A
    CAGGATTCAGAACTTC-1	CI	B
    GAACCTAAGAGAGGTA-1	CI	B
    ACATGGTGTAGACGCA-1	CI	C
    CCCTGATTCGGATAGG-1	CI	C

.. code-block:: none

    sinto addtags [-h] -b BAM -f TAGFILE -o OUTPUT [-t] [-s] [-p NPROC]
                        [-m MODE]

    Add read tags to reads from individual cells

    optional arguments:
    -h, --help            show this help message and exit
    -b BAM, --bam BAM     Input bam file (must be indexed)
    -f TAGFILE, --tagfile TAGFILE
                            Tab-delimited file containing cell barcode, tag to be
                            added, and tag identity. Can be gzip compressed
    -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                            Name for output BAM file
    -t, --trim_suffix     Remove trail 2 characters from cell barcode in BAM
                            file
    -s, --sam             Output sam format (default bam output)
    -p NPROC, --nproc NPROC
                            Number of processors (default = 1)
    -m MODE, --mode MODE  Either tag (default) or readname. Some BAM file store
                            the cell barcode in the readname rather than under a
                            read tag


This will add a ``CI`` tag, with the tag set to A, B, or C depending on the cell barcode sequence.


Convert read tag to read group
-------------------------------

Read groups can be added to a SAM/BAM file based on an arbitrary read tag using the
``tagtorg`` command. Let's assume we have a SAM file called ``input.sam``
with the following contents:

.. code-block:: none

    @HD	VN:1.5	SO:coordinate
    @SQ	SN:20	LN:63025520
    @RG	ID:rg1	SM:sample_1	LB:1	PU:1	PL:ILLUMINA
    r002	0	20	9	30	3S6M1P1I4M	*	0	0	AAAAGATAAGGATA	*	CB:Z:AAAA-1	RG:Z:rg1
    r003	0	20	9	30	3S6M1P1I4M	*	0	0	AAAAGATAAGGATA	*	CB:Z:CCCC-1	RG:Z:rg1

We would like to assign each read to a separate read group according to the value of
it's ``CB`` tag. First, we need a list of tag values that we expect to see:

.. code-block:: none

    AAAA-1
    CCCC-1

Let us assume that the barcodes are stored in a file called ``barcodes.txt``.
Then we can replace the read groups in the SAM file using the command:

.. code-block::

    sinto tagtorg -b input.sam -f barcodes.txt

This will print the following SAM file to screen:

.. code-block::

    @HD	VN:1.5	SO:coordinate
    @SQ	SN:20	LN:63025520
    @RG	ID:rg1	SM:sample_1	LB:1	PU:1	PL:ILLUMINA
    @RG	ID:rg1:CCCC-1	SM:sample_1:CCCC-1	LB:1	PU:1	PL:ILLUMINA
    @RG	ID:rg1:AAAA-1	SM:sample_1:AAAA-1	LB:1	PU:1	PL:ILLUMINA
    r002	0	20	9	30	3S6M1P1I4M	*	0	0	AAAAGATAAGGATA	*	CB:Z:AAAA-1	RG:Z:rg1:AAAA-1
    r003	0	20	9	30	3S6M1P1I4M	*	0	0	AAAAGATAAGGATA	*	CB:Z:CCCC-1	RG:Z:rg1:CCCC-1

Two new @RG tags have been added to the header with SM fields that are cell
barcode-specic. The two reads r002 and r003 have been assigned new RG tags
according to their cell barcode.

.. code-block:: none

    usage: sinto tagtorg [-h] -b BAM [--tag TAG] -f TAGFILE [-o OUTPUT] [-O O]

    Append a read tag to the read group ID of each read. Also appends the read tag
    to the SM field of the read group.

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -b BAM, --bam BAM     Input SAM/BAM file, '-' reads from stdin
      --tag TAG             Read tag to extract the value from that is appended to
                            the read group. Default is 'CB', the tag that is used
                            in 10x sequencing to identify cells.
      -f TAGFILE, --tagfile TAGFILE
                            List of expected tag values. Reads with tag values
                            that are not in this list are not altered.
      -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                            Output SAM/BAM file, '-' outputs to stdout (default
                            '-')
      -O OUTPUTFORMAT, --outputformat OUTPUTFORMAT
                            Output format. One of 't' (SAM), 'b' (BAM), or 'u'
                            (uncompressed BAM) ('t' default)
